[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well welcome everyone welcome
to church history and theology as we get
to delve into one of the last Apostles
remaining in the first century this is
one of those lessons that has taken uh a
great deal of time to prepare in fact
I'm releasing the episode a little bit
late because I wanted to get all of the
research lined up well and it took me a
little bit longer than it usually does
but that is okay I would rather it be
accurate than on time uh ideally I
prefer both but uh but here we sit and
so here we have Series 2 episode 18 John
the last
Apostle now when we are dealing with a
figure like John it is quite an
interesting juxtaposition because we
have so much of his writing he writes
two of the longest books in the New
Testament and three Epistles yet about
his private and personal life we know so
very very little this is a very unique
issue that we have so for instance when
we deal with Paul who's the only person
to have written more New Testament
documents than John we have manner of
details about his personal life uh and
we have all manner of ways of dating
when he wrote everything we have almost
every one of his books settled down to
about a 2-year span uh of of
possibilities of when they're written
it's really quite remarkable but when it
comes to John the ironic thing is that
there's no author of the New Testament
whose whose works are actually more in
debate uh or or more I guess more the
term would be veiled from us as to when
exactly they were written we know what
time frame they must have taken place in
and that is when he is well advanced in
age but narrowing it down to anything
more than just to say like the last 20
or 25 years of his life is really very
difficult we're going to attempt to do
this on some of these things but I
really wanted to walk you through what
we do know about him as a person who he
is and what we can actually reconstruct
from the biblical text now I will say
this some of the things that I'm going
to say in here are a little bit
controversial um but they do represent
my opinion on these things uh and I will
let you know um that there are some
things that are probable uh there are
some things that are possible uh and
then there are some things that are
plausible but at all points uh I will
stick as close as I can to the text of
scripture and what we know from history
that's kind of the Habit that I want to
have here um as well as a quick uh
announcement here for those of you who
are longtime listeners of church history
and theology uh or those of you who have
uh been following it really for the past
year and a half um so this will only
take about 30 45 seconds here to
announce um going forward I'm going to
be focusing on the audio side of this uh
of this show uh video editing is really
frustrating to me and um it it takes up
so much more of the time in preparation
for each episode uh then its payoff has
been um over over 90% way over 90% of
the audience uh listens to the audio
version of this and so I'm going to be
doubling down my efforts uh specifically
there um having a higher quality audio
and then uh the video is uh is really
just going to be waveform videos and
things like this going forward plus I
have a perfect face for audio podcasting
and so that's kind of what we're going
to be looking forward uh to the uh in
the the future um that and it also makes
it easier for sharing and transporting
and all sorts of other things
so all right John the last
Apostle John is one of the more
fascinating figures uh really for this
Jos I already mentioned here but also in
how hard it is to actually nail down
facts about his life even in his own
Gospel he does not mention his name he
doesn't talk about himself he just
merely calls himself by this moniker the
disciple whom Jesus
loved and I don't think there's any more
fitting uh of a frustration as a
historian trying to rebuild somebody's
life of somebody who specifically
removed themselves out of the Limelight
he does this with his gospels he does
this even with his Epistles all three of
them uh merely even the first one
doesn't even list at his name but the
second and third one uh are definitely
more personal letters um but it's it's
this it's this remarkable thing where he
is establishing how close he was to
Jesus and yet always pulls the attention
away from himself well as much as I
respect that uh when we want to study
church history we have to pay attention
even to those who uh pull the attention
away from themselves and so that's what
we're aiming to do so let me give you
what I am saying is the best
reconstruction that I can come up with
for the life of John the
Apostle he was born
somewhere around the year 6 to 10 a
which makes him uh several years younger
than Jesus and he was born as as uh all
of us are aware as a son of Zebedee uh
what some of us are probably not aware
of is that his mother's name was salomi
we get this from Cross referencing Mark
15:40 and Matthew
27:56 Mark 1540 is a list of the women
who are at the cross at the foot of the
cross and it lists them out as Mary
Magdalene Mary the mother of James the
younger and josies and
salomi those same three women show up in
the list in Matthew 27 Matthew 27:56
lists Out Among whom were Mary Magdalene
Mary the mother of James and Joseph and
the mother of the sons of Zebedee that
being the exact same parallel list
between both Mark and Matthew lists out
that not only is her name salomi but she
is also the mother of the sons of
Zebedee the sons of Zebedee Being John
and James um the other James again we
always have the difficulty of James with
the New Testament there's there's four
different ones and this one would be the
Apostle James the one who was martyred
in the year 44 uh this is uh James the
brother of John and the son of zebede
and salomi so John here as salomi uh and
zebede have these two Sons James and
John their interactions throughout the
gospels are always actually quite
fascinating and a little bit more
Ecentric than we will uh have
interactions with some of the others uh
you have for instance you actually have
more involvement of John's mother in the
ministry then we have of pretty much
anybody else's mother in fact we have I
I don't believe for any other Apostle do
we have their mother listed as being
involved in their Ministry at all uh you
have Peter's mother-in-law uh and that's
an interesting uh interaction there in
the gospel of Matthew but as far as for
the rest of the familial reactions and
interactions uh we know very very little
for John though it's
different John's mother is salomi she's
there at the foot of the cross but she's
also been in the narrative elsewise you
may have passed over it pretty quickly
uh in in more bizarre passages that we
will see as we go forward where she's
you know making special requests of
Jesus uh about her
sons one of the things that we get here
as well is something that I never grew
up fully grasping or understanding
because there's always been try to
explain away issues in John chapter 19
but in John's account of what's
happening at the foot of the cross it it
uses Mark and Matthew but it builds on
that a bit and says at standing at the
foot of the cross he actually lists out
four women there uh one is Jesus's
mother in John
19:25 uh standing by the cross John
writes that were his mother his mother's
Sister Mary the wife of clus and Mary
Magdalene now there are those who put
forward that there's only three women
listed here but that does not
linguistically uh necessitate nor does
it make any sense culturally as it would
ensure that both Mary Jesus's mother and
her sister were named Mary that is not a
uh plausible or probable or possible
well maybe possible uh that does not fit
or pass any uh sniff test as far as I'm
concerned the simplest explanation here
is that we have two unnamed women and
two named women well we know the mother
of Jesus's name obviously and John is
making very particular not to name her U
and he does this sometimes which is a
little bit strange but he does the same
thing with himself and as we will see
here his
family by standing by the cross of Jesus
where his mother Jesus's mother and his
mother's sister meaning Jesus's Aunt
Mary the wife of clus and Mary Magdalene
now in the same list that we have from
Mark and Matthew what I am going to
argue as the most plausible explanation
here uh now I know we're we're running
to the cross and all this but I I have
to lay this out here because to identify
this woman actually helps establish some
things about the story of
John this woman standing here at the
cross we have Jesus's mother mother's
Sister Mary the wife of Copus and Mary
Magdalene if we are to take Mark 15:40
Matthew 27:56 and John 19:25 I believe
the most plausible the most sensible
reading is not only there four women at
the foot of the cross in John
19 but that the woman here that is
listed as Mary's sister or as Jesus's
mother's sister is that same salomi that
we saw listed out in Mark and Matthew I
am not alone in this in church history
uh there this is not a a rare
interpretation uh it it does seem to be
really the most sensible reading of all
of the text put together one of the
other readings that doesn't make any
sense that is actually one of the more
common readings is that um Mary's sister
Jesus's mother's sister is Mary the wife
of kopus and that that one does not pass
any test whatsoever in my mind uh the
idea of two sisters being made to Mary
just doesn't work but it also greatly
explains a few other Oddities in the
gospel narratives um and we're going to
get into that uh a little bit later on
once uh once we cross those in John's
timeline so I want you to understand
when I refer to this this would mean
that the Apostle John is Jesus's first
cousin I want that to settle in just for
a second because John the uh John the
Baptist is commonly referred to as
Jesus's cousin but we also know that
that's not the case he was his relative
uh if anything Mary and Elizabeth their
mothers were cousins that would be about
the closest uh Rel there the Greek term
sunus is used for their it just means
relative it's a close relative and so
the closest they could really be using
that term would be cousin and so Mary
and Elizabeth would have been cousins
making Jesus and John the Baptist second
cousins well here we have James and
John as first cousins if my plausible
and sensible reading I agree uh would
make that clear here as we build this
through we start to understand why
certain things are being said in certain
ways and I want you to see how this goes
as far as for John and so I just wanted
to have that in the background as far as
for John the story that we have that we
can reconstruct for him really starts in
the year
25 or 28 depending on how you date the
crucifixion of Jesus which is by the way
a really interesting discussion that I
don't want to get into right now
whether 25 or 28 it's kind of dependent
upon the years of Jesus's crucifixion to
date this because it would be five years
beforehand as a teenager about the years
uh about the age 15 to 19 years of age
he becomes a disciple of John the
Baptist who again as I mentioned is
likely the second cousin of his as well
as of Jesus's he this is a relative of
his which is why he would have been a
disciple of John the Baptist and at
least aware of him just like Mary so
would have been a cousin to
Elizabeth and so this would have me
meant that John being a disciple of John
the Baptist would have been perfectly
normal uh there would have been a family
relation there there would have been a
familiarity there and uh and we see this
in John chapter 1: 35 to 40 says the
next day again John meaning John the
Baptist was standing with two of his
disciples and he looked at Jesus as he
walked by and said Behold the Lamb of
God the two disciples heard him say this
and they followed Jesus Jesus turned and
saw them following him and said to them
what are you seeking and they said to
him Rabbi which means teacher where are
you
staying he said to them come and you
will see and so they came and saw where
he was staying and they stayed with him
that day for it is about the 10th hour
one of the two who heard John speak and
followed Jesus was Andrew Simon Peter's
brother the
unnamed part of this the unnamed part of
the list is undoubtedly John uh the
apost Apostle uh this is this is his
habit throughout his gospel as he does
not name himself uh and that that is
pretty much without uh without challenge
here it shows that John and Andrew were
both uh were both Disciples of John the
Baptist before they were Apostles and
Disciples of Jesus which means the
interaction between them is familiar
again James and John sons of Zebedee as
well as Peter and Andrew were uh joined
together with in some level of
familiarity business-wise as
fishermen this is what they grew up
doing now John here early on follows
John the Baptist uh which is a really
fascinating development as well as his
age he is in his mid- teenage years at
this point uh very early on in his own
life when Jesus comes along as as John
writes in John chapter 1 uh there's a
lot of John's in this right now hang on
uh around the year 27 or 30 depending on
how you name these things and depending
on how you work out these timelines he
becomes a disciple of Jesus and he's
around 19 years old or about 20 years
old at that time uh and for the next 3
years he is uniquely present in nearly
every event of Jesus's Ministry
alongside his brother James and
Peter Peter is someone whom he worked
with as far as for fishing and whose
brother Andrew was uh disciples with
John the Baptist along with
John John gets to be front row and
almost
center with all of the unique happenings
for Jesus's most Inner Circle of
disciples Peter James and John John here
for what reason he takes on this close
role is only exceeded by the difficulty
of understanding why Peter took on such
a high role as well Peter takes in that
place there but if we are to understand
James and John as the first cousins of
Jesus that makes more sense to us but
Peter doesn't really fit that John here
in this makes more sense to us he may be
about 19 or 20 years old at this point
uh and he is present for moments like
the
Transfiguration where with his own eyes
he sees Moses and Elijah and Jesus
conver vering right he is present for
things that the other nine disciples are
not allowed to see things like the
raising of gyrus is daughter the
Transfiguration as we just
mentioned and also there's this unusual
moment where in the middle of ministry
in Matthew chapter 20 we see his mother
asking for a really unique request
Matthew chap 20: 20 to 23 show us this
it says then the mother of the sons of
Zebedee came up to him him with her sons
and kneeling before him she asked him
for something and he said to her what do
you
want she said to him say that these two
sons of mine are to sit one at your
right hand and one at your left in your
kingdom Jesus answered and said you do
not know what you are asking are you
able to drink the cup that I am to drink
they said to him we are able he said to
them you will drink my cup but to sit at
my right hand and at my left is not mine
to Grant
but it is for those for whom it has been
prepared by my
father well if you know your church
history well you know the book of Axwell
you know that James who was being asked
of this by his mother as well James
becomes one of the first
Martyrs John however lived beyond all of
them and suffered his own persecutions
but died an old
man John becomes present for things for
since he even goes further into the
Garden of Gethsemane than the others do
uh he finds himself at the foot of the
cross as we read there in uh in John 19
not only with those four women there
they're present with his mother and Mary
herself um there is given to his
responsibility we'll address that there
when we get
there at the Last Supper John is
reclining next to Jesus shows a
closeness there that is uh friendly that
is is
definitive the next day he is spoken to
by Christ at the cross to take care of
his mother Mary uh again if my plausible
reading of this is concerned uh this is
John's aunt and so that actually makes
perfect sense he would be in the same
family and as John would have been a
Believer there and Jesus knowing that
John would even outlive James this all
makes sense it actually starts to line
things up a little bit more when we
understand you know those I think those
two stories of where John and James's
mother comes and makes this special
request it always confused me like why
would she think that her her sons of
anyone would would have a more prominent
role in the kingdom and it's like oh oh
they're his cousins and they're looking
for special treatment to his family all
right now it's starting to make more
sense or like for instance when when
Jesus from the cross speaks to John and
says behold mother look there's your
mother and you know uh to his mother he
says look your son and that makes more
sense if he's his first cousin he is
taking care of his mother in his last
moments that then checks
out when we look at all of that the
story of John during the ministry of
Jesus is familiar to us that's one of
the reasons why I'm not I'm not spending
our time on every sing single moment or
every single issue that comes
up it is kind of after that that things
go a little bit less clear for most
people and that's where I spent most of
my time reconstructing
this when the book of Acts opens we find
him with the rest of the Apostles there
in the upper room they are confused but
hopeful outside there's nothing but
confusion but inside the upper room
There's Hope and that's a wonderful
thing they are present not only with um
his brother and the rest of the Apostles
there you see uh Mary Jesus's mother and
Jesus's brothers uh now even after the
um after the resurrection after the
viewing of all this and um it's uh the
day of Pentecost is fantastic it's
really incredible and in this year he's
you know mid
20s
and this is kind of the strange part
about this is that as the years go on
here for the next several years he he's
in his mid to Upper 20s here he becomes
one of the leading Apostles in
Jerusalem that is a very unusual
placement for somebody that is so young
at this point and a part of his story is
told in Acts chapter 3 and four uh that
is kind of about the last time people
think about John as far as church
history is concerned because the book of
Acts doesn't make large mentions of him
Beyond this you have acts chapters 3 and
4 where he and Peter
come across the lame beggar in the
temple you'll remember this from Sunday
school and healed him both he and Peter
uh are brought before the council and
recognized to be and I quote uneducated
common men
unquote but they had miraculous
proofs everyone that frequented the
temple which is everyone knew this lame
beggar who himself was many years along
and everyone knew knew him as the one
who would sit in the temple gate and
beg more than that Peter and John had a
supernatural boldness about them and the
entire Council the Sanhedrin and so
forth were unable to deny the power that
they had and so the council simply
ordered them to stop and they did so
with threats if they
didn't to which both Peter and John
replied but Peter and John answered them
it says in Acts chapter 14 Acts chapter
4 whether it is right in the sight of
God to listen to you rather than to God
you must
judge for we cannot but speak of what we
have seen and of what we have
heard this for us sets up an
understanding of really who John
is if if you could put it into a single
terminology for how he puts forward his
relationship to the ministry of Jesus
Christ it would be that is eyewitness
he is one who has seen this he is one
who has handled this he is one who has
beheld this and this is something that
has changed him
substantially it's changed him into
being one that is more like
Christ who through the love of God
entered into the world and from that has
encouraged us not just encouraged us but
enabled us through salvation to love one
another as the years go on his ministry
in Jerusalem continues he ministers
alongside Peter and alongside James his
brother who being martyred in the year
44 ad is more or less replaced by James
the Lord's brother after his
martyrdom
when Paul is talking about his trip to
Jerusalem he discusses the three pillars
of the church that are there in
Jerusalem that being Peter James the
Lord's brother and John
he does this in Galatians chap 2: 8-9
where he says uh for he who worked
through Peter for his Apostolic Ministry
to the circumcised worked also through
me for mine to the Gentiles and when
James and sephus and John who seem to be
pillars perceived the grace that was
given to me they gave the right hand of
Fellowship to Barnabas and me that we
should go to the Gentiles and that they
should go to the
circumcised Paul here is describing his
trip to Jerusalem in the year 49 ad
where the Jerusalem Council took place
meaning we can deduce even though the
book of Acts has ceased discussing the
uh the Apostle John we can deduce that
John was present there at the Jerusalem
Council uh Jesus was also commissioned
in that year and agreed to pursue a
Ministry not to the Gentiles but to the
circumcised the Jewish people at that
very time in Council the same as Peter
and James the Lord's brother uh all of
them being present in Jerusalem and
focused on Ministry there in the year in
the
50s uh and again the same thing goes
with any history of these things what we
are trying to reconstruct is where were
these people and what were they doing
and what did they teach and what can we
learn from them for John what we can do
is address that his role in Jerusalem
was alongside Peter and James the Lord's
brother specifically devoted to a
Ministry to the Gentile or not to the
Gentile world but to the Jewish
world and for the next 15 years that
continues on there were difficulties in
Jerusalem there were um massive famines
in the 50s things that we watch Paul
raising money for and bringing things
back to Jerusalem and uh you know and
giving responses to uh the value of of
working alongside them uh John again
being commissioned to do this he would
have been present for all of this um
this would have been part of his
ministry to the Jewish Church especially
in Jerusalem where un undoubtedly he
continued in Ministry for over a
decade you have his coworker James the
Lord's brother martyred in the year 62
ad we we discussed James the Lord's
brother at length uh and and uh
establish that date as well as all of
the things that came after that the
Jewish and Christian relations in
Jerusalem just disintegrated after this
and from the year 62 to 66 we have uh
the the continuing disintegration of any
relationships that they have leading all
the way up into the year 66 ad where the
first Jewish Roman War breaks out uh and
Christians would have all scattered from
Jerusalem
this is the date in my reconstruction
that makes the most sense for John to
leave Jerusalem for where he devotes the
rest of his life in Ministry and that is
the city of
Ephesus this is where he will call home
for the rest of his life this we can
reconstruct from all manner of tradition
which has no reason to lie about this um
in fact we are able to reconstructed
fairly well um from those who were even
ministers in Ephesus and would know uh
it would have been just as recent for
them especially in seeing his tomb there
uh and write about it in the end of the
2 Century it would have been just as
fresh for them as for you to be uh
looking at a story regarding World War
well let's see World War II at this
point would no World War I and and
seeing uh a gravide of somebody who died
at that point that's how close we have
some of the writings of of uh of
eyewitnesses of where he uh ended his
life the man in which that happens is a
little bit up for question we'll get to
that in just a little bit uh but what's
fascinating is after John leaves
Jerusalem we know so very little about
his story that is actually
knowable uh it's and it's ironic because
this is actually where all of his
writing takes place all right you you
got to grasp that good by the year 66
when he is almost certainly out out of
Jerusalem he's not saying in Jerusalem
past the year 66 that's not that's not
historically plausible at all uh so by
the time he goes out of the out of
Jerusalem in the year 66 he hasn't
written anything right not the Gospel of
John not the three Epistles uh not the
Book of Revelation all of these things
come after the year
66 and so that that really establishes
something for us because the other
apostles who are writing vast swads of
the New Testament are all or just about
to be dead at this point Paul and Peter
are suffering their martyrdoms in Rome
under neronian persecution which again
remind yourselves is is only relegated
to Rome and the surrounding areas it is
not Empire wide if you don't really get
empire-wide
persecutions until much
later and so you have this this issue of
the fact that his story as far as what
we know pretty much stops but everything
from his pen hasn't started yet
and so we get to see the conclusions of
an apostle who has spent his life
ministering to Jewish people and now is
living in a gentile world looking back
to things way in the
past and so the gospel that he writes
the Gospel of John towards the end of
his life he's outliving every other
Apostle that's the that's the setting
you have to get when you read the Gospel
of
John right it it's it's this it's this
Broad
um Eternal like compendium that is
written to Greek speakers almost
obviously yet from the perspective of
somebody who has lived among Jews and
ministered to them almost his entire
life and is almost writing this in his
retirement that's the setting of John's
writings in the New
Testament this this gospel we'll just
talk about that for a little bit written
towards the end of his life knowing that
perspective as he is outliving every
other apossible watching them either
either go to India or or go to Egypt or
be uh martyred in Rome or whatever the
case may taken place as he continues to
live on he is the last Apostle
standing and I want you to hear his
words from that Vantage
Point hear this from his own pen in in
John chapter
1 the True Light
which gives light to
everyone was coming into the
world he was in the world and the world
was made through him and yet the world
did not know
him he came to his
own and his own people did not receive
him listen to the Heartbreak for the
Jewish people's rejection of Christ in
those
words he spent Decades of his life
devoted to ministering to the
circumcision
party and he writes in his gospel after
all of those years in his retirement and
saying he came to his own and his own
people did not receive
him
but and I think that's one of those
conjunctions that for the life of John
is one of the most important here in
John chapter 1 but to all who did
receive him who believed in his name he
gave the right to become children of God
who are born not of blood nor of the
will of the flesh nor of the will of man
but of
God and the word became flesh and dwelt
among us and we have seen his glory
glory as of the only son from the father
Full of Grace and
Truth Listen to what he
learned that Jesus Christ came into the
world and the world did not receive him
he came into his
own and his own people did not receive
him but what John has learned throughout
all these years is that all who did
receive him Jew or Gentile it doesn't
matter those who believed in his
name Christ has given the right to
become children of God because they were
born not of blood or the will of the
flesh or the will of man they were born
from God in other words they are born
again new
birth there is a unifying message in his
writings regarding Jewish and Gentile
branches of the first century church
that we do not find except in how Paul
writes about this didactically but here
we see it almost reflectively we see it
devotionally John follows this up by
saying for the law was given through
Moses
Grace and Truth came through Jesus
Christ in John's gospel and Epistles we
do not find Long reasoning to dispel the
wonderings of the Skeptics we have
direct eyewitness
assertions we do not find answers to all
of our
questions we find the truth Christ
himself we do not find answers to the
Practical toils of this life nor
pragmatic Appeals to temporal struggles
we find eternal
life eternal
principles Eternal hope all centered on
the person and work of Christ
Jesus even if you sit down John and ask
him what is it that we are to be doing
to be doing the works of God his answer
is not follow this law or that he merely
would quote
Christ as he did in John chapter
6 where the crowd said to Jesus what
must we do to be doing the works of God
and Jesus answered
theme this is the work of God do you
believe in him whom he has
sent throughout all of John's writings
there are enduring themes of
Fellowship of Christian
love of keeping ourselves from
Idols they've always been attached to
the reputation of this disciple whom
Jesus loved that sought all Christians
to emulate that and to love one another
for love is from
God some of the most reliable Traditions
do say that as he went to Ephesus he
took Mary the Mother of Our Lord with
him and she died there as well as he but
before he died there as you saw we saw
him writing gospel and his Epistles we
also have another instance of his life
and that is his days on
patmas now before we come to the story
of The Book of Revelation which we are
not going to be talking about in length
but we are going to be talking about
what this reveals about uh what we can
know about history John at
patmas is for us one of these difficult
to reconstruct parts of the
narrative theories regarding this uh
flow all the way from the 60s up to the
9s and honestly that should show you
more how little we know about John than
how much evidence we have for either the
60s or the
90s the funny thing about this is that
neither in the 60s nor in the 90s do we
have evidence of any
Imperial um persecution of Christians
reaching into Asia Minor where he
lived and so the datings that come from
The Book of Revelation that deal with
the dates of the neronian persecution or
the supposed demission
persecution those dates don't really
apply to Asia Minor because neither of
those persecutions the first one
specifically are reaching into Asia
Minor D mission's persecution is really
for political things not really for
seeking out Christians so that one makes
not much sense
anyway when we build this out it makes a
little more sense if we know
iography John is living in Ephesus at
the time that whatever this persecution
is breaks out and we see in the Book of
Revelation
1:9 where he reflects on this he says I
John your brother and partner in the
tribulation in the kingdom and the
patient endurance that are in Jesus I
was on the island called patmas on
account of the word of God and the
testimony of Jesus I'll stop there for a
second
there has been much discussion about
what exactly is going on
here and I agree this is an
exiling um to the island of patmas it's
not exactly an undeveloped Island by any
stretch but it is a place that uh is now
only and thoroughly known for its
history of having John the Revelator
writing there on that
island when you know geography it starts
to make a little bit more sense what's
going on John living in Ephesus patmas
is only 60 mil
away
this Exile I'm going to put forward to
you is not an imperial
Exile this would have been a local
Governor ordering this banishment not an
emperor it makes the dating of it uh
unfortunately while I think that is more
of an accurate explanation for what's
going on here uh it makes the dating of
this absolutely
impossible uh some early Traditions
place it during the reign of demission
but those early Traditions are also
trying to reconstruct demission as a
second Nero which is not accurate uh
there's shockingly little historical
evidence for a persecution of demission
that reaches into Asia Minor or really
anywhere for that matter later Christian
writers for really more pical reasons
are attempting to turn demission into
Nero part 2 but that's unsubstantiated
by what we know Roman historians for
instance readily discussed and condemned
Nero's abusive Christians yet none of
them describ such a thing for demission
not in any detail whatsoever that we can
reconstruct anything on on the level of
what Nero did and what Nero did was
relegated only to Rome and its
surrounding areas and so this whole
this and so this whole concept
is relegated to more Theory and
conjecture and later tradition which
really makes this difficult to trust in
we have further complications to it as
here um it seems that well the bottom
line is that the dating for the Book of
Revelation has to be set for the
internal evidences found in chapters 2
and three uh in the letters of the
historical churches to Asia Minor and
without getting into the weeds here I
believe they supported an 80s day
perhaps '90s but I think that's
stretching it 60s is also stretching it
as not only did such disagreements as
described in in those two chapters not
really materialized yet in the 60s it
doesn't fit John's time in Jerusalem and
only just now arriving in Asia Minor he
seems much more established with these
seven churches one of whom is actually
his own home church that is the church
in Ephesus
he seems much more established than
simply being able to identify himself to
these seven churches signing just the
name
John they know who he is they know where
this letter is coming from it's coming
from patmas we know John John is now in
Ephesus John goes to patmas John's
writing these seven letters he sends
them to these churches that are all
surrounding in Ephesus they all know who
he
is all of that fits
but the real truth is we cannot know for
certain nor any more accurately than
that we are left with much less Clarity
on its composition than most people
think even tulan expresses something
else that no one else reports uh and
this is fascinating because even uus is
aware of
tertullian's um uh documentation here
but does not include this as a
historical uh instance at all but you
may have heard of this in passing
tertian uh expresses
that JN was attempted to be boiled in
oil before being sent to patmas um which
again historically there's um even uus
knew there was there was no evidence as
that being a thing that happened in
John's day uh not to John or honestly
any Christian or even that as a
normative form of execution it was just
kind of a bizarre thing that we see in
taran's account uh one that I agree with
youus on which you know it's it's
another day I guess um
that that's not a historically plausible
story uh he is discussed as having been
dipped in boiling oil but then suffering
absolutely no burns from it whatsoever
and then all the people who are in the
amphitheater there that witnessed this
all of them became Christians it just
it's just more hagiography if you know
what I
mean such ahistorical embellishments
clue Us in that what we're listening to
is something unreliable and so we don't
really include that into the story but I
wanted you to at least know where the
history of that came from every
ecclesiastical historian in history
though disagrees with everyone else on
the particulars of John's life and so
when I when I lay out all of this
understand that we are limited in what
we can know but what we do know is this
John was buried in Ephesus which means
he went home from patmas after a certain
amount of banishment this is
universal he returned from patmas and
lived out his days in Ephesus if the
apocalypse was in the 70s then he wrote
his gospels and letters after it if he
wrote The Apocalypse in the 80s then his
gospel and letters were largely
contemporaneous maybe before or after it
uh during that time frame some
traditions have him living until the
rule of trun but again some of those
historical statements need to be taken
with a bit of salt uh so like for
instance traan starts ruling in the year
um that would have placed JN upwards of
92 years old uh and perhaps that's the
biggest clue that we're talking about
the wrong decade um that age in the
first century while not impossible is
utterly exceptionally strange and rare
um like very exceptionally rare uh
unfortunately only historical references
that we have for that is irenaeus who um
has a very tenuous grasp on when people
die like for instance he argues that
Jesus was older than 50 and died as an
old man uh so you have to take those
things again with grain assault uh their
their concept and even their resources
in the 2 century were not developed
enough uh to actually reconstruct these
things in a reliable
manner
um yeah so that becomes a problem so
like in many things um if if something
comes as a soul Source through irus we
have a problem um his grasp of
historical reality is oddly limited so
he even argues for instance that direct
Bishops go all the way back to the
apostles which we also know to be a
historical and a reconstruction of a
later
time often times these things were
written at a distance and include things
that we know to be historical errors
errors so you know it is it is what it
is but I wanted to express to you I
wanted to actually read for you here at
the end uh this uh short letter that we
have from the end of the second Century
that actually expel explains out the uh
the an eyewitness account of the tomb of
John in Ephesus I think that would be
helpful uh for us to get plus also this
kind of early church writer doesn't get
any you know press ever in fact I would
argue that probably the vast majority of
you have never heard of his name before
um his name is uh
pcres and he writes a letter to the
bishop in Rome at the time named Victor
uh and it's it's in the middle of a
discussion and an argument over the
dating of Easter of all things uh
believe it or not as we all get to the
end of the 2 Century that becomes an
enormous debate for about 140 years uh
it's called the quarter deimon uh
controversy uh don't don't get stuck
into that we'll spend an entire evening
talking about it um when we get to the
end of the second century but I want to
give you this this letter from uh PES uh
to Victor in the Roman Church and PES is
a bishop in Ephesus in around the year
190 okay so that's the setting here's
here's this
letter he says as for us then we
scrupulously observe the exact day
speaking of Easter neither adding nor
taking away for in Asia great luminaries
have gone to their rest who shall rise
again in the day of the coming of the
Lord when he cometh with Glory from
heaven and shall raise again all the
saints
I speak of Phillip one of the twel
apostles who is laid to rest in
hieropolis with two with his two
daughters who arrived at old age
unmarried his other daughters his other
daughter also who passed her life under
the influence of the Holy Spirit and
reposes here at Ephesus John moreover
who reclined on the Lord's bosom and who
became a priest wearing the miter and a
witness and a teacher he rests at
Ephesus then there is polycarp the
bishop and Martyr at Smyrna and thases
of Yia both bishop and Martyr who rests
at Smyrna why should I speak of Saras
bishop and Martyr who rested Leota the
Blessed Papyrus moreover and of Milo the
unic who performed all his actions under
the influence of the Holy Spirit and
lies at Sardis awaiting the visitation
from heaven when he shall rise from the
dead Rise Again from the dead these all
kept the Passover on the 14th day of the
month in accordance with the gospel
without ever deviating from it but
keeping to the rule of Faith moreover I
also pcres whom uh who am the least of
you all in accordance with the tradition
of my relatives some of whom I have
succeeded seven of my relatives were
Bishops and I am the eighth and my
relatives always observe the day when
the people put away the leaven I myself
Brethren I say who Am 65 years old in
the Lord and have fallen in with the
brethren in all parts of the world and
have read uh through all Holy Scripture
I'm not a frightened at the things which
are said to terrify us for those who are
greater than I have said we ought to
obey God rather than
men I'll add in a side note here that's
a quote of John by the
way all right back to the letter I might
also have made mention of the Bishops
associated with me whom it was your own
desire to have called together by me and
I called them together whose names if I
were to write them down would amount to
a great number
these Bishops on coming to see me
unworthy as I am signified their United
approval of the letter knowing that I
wore these gray hairs not in vain but
have always regulated my conduct in
obedience to the Lord
Jesus and there are the letter
ends I do find it fascinating that he
even quotes John in uh in the early
parts of Acts where you know what is it
that we should be listening to should we
be listening to the words of man uh or
to the words of God you must judge we
cannot but speak of what we have seen
and heard and this is this is exactly
what pcres is using the same argument
for here he's saying look I'm a bishop
in Ephesus we have his tomb right here
and we have this lesson from him uh that
he's celebrated Easter on this date and
that and so forth um and we have this
tradition that goes back etc etc so when
we get into the uh uh quarter deem
controversy we'll talk all about the
legitimacy of those claims and whatnot
but for for right here the idea of of of
him establishing himself he is a bishop
in the very same city where John did his
final years of ministering uh and and
passed away a hundred years
prior that expresses to us just in
bypassing as no reason to be lying about
uh the fact that John's tomb is sitting
right there that would have been easily
refutable and so the idea that uh we
don't know exactly what went on and yet
we know what the bookends are more than
that we we know what John wrote and we
know his heart and this I think is the
most uh wonderful takeaway regarding the
life of John regarding his focus on what
is important uh the love of one another
love of God in fact this is how everyone
will know that you are the Disciples of
Jesus Christ because you have his love
in your heart this this devotion this
self-sacrificial service to one another
is something that that defined his life
and characterized his focus in life
these enduring themes of Fellowship of
Christian
love and I'll finish off with the very
same words that he left his readers of
First John with little children keep
yourselves from
Idols may the Lord who loves us all
Delight our path to walk in the same way
love one another for love is from
God Lord's blessings to you all
[Music]
[Applause]